This repository is the cumulative result of approximately 75 hours of work spread over 2 weeks. Our goals were manifold, and as a result there are many different files representing our forays into data analysis and app design. We recommend first opening excel_import_test.mlapp, then excel_import_test_in_progress.mlapp, and finally, real_data_test.mlapp (the most final and polished app with contributions from all three group members) to have a gauge of our chronological progress. Note that sleepstudy1.xlsx contains numbers randomly generated using Excel functions, and should not show any strong correlation.

Some notes on the data in SleepTable.xlsx:

This data is anonymized and real. We borrowed the data from a study which is cite at the end of our video and can be found here: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0181978. 

In this study, researchers observed depleted levels of ATP, indicating altered mitochondrial functioning, which is significant as previous studies link such changes to neurological diseases, including neurodegenerative diseases. They found that baseline cortisol levels were associated with ATP levels, with lower cortisol levels correlating with higher ATP levels at baseline. This aligns with previous findings suggesting that cortisol stimulates processes that consume ATP. However, after sleep deprivation, this relationship between cortisol and ATP levels disappeared. Morning cortisol levels, which are typically higher, were significantly lower after sleep deprivation, possibly due to increased negative feedback regulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. This regulation might also explain the lack of correlation between cortisol and ATP levels after sleep deprivation. We decided to solely focus on cortisol levels and how sleep deprivation leads to changes in initial spikes in cortisol levels. 

Our app investigates a potential correlation between baseline hours of sleep and changes to cortisol levels following a night of sleep deprivation. While we do find a correlation, it is not very strong; subjects' cortisol levels after sleep deprivation tended to deviate from normal regardless of their baseline level of sleep. Put simply, this indicates that no matter how much sleep you usually get, pulling just one all-nighter can deleteriously impact your body's precious homeostasis!
